hello mata fans welcome to a special
edition
of tom rock's maths with many many
special guests these two for example
to kick us off kai thank you very much
yes sir i'm kyle adaman
and i was a contestant on channel four's
countdown
uh back in 2008 at the ripe old age of
11 years old
and you were not just a contestant come
on let's let's let's get it all out of
the table yeah okay
i i was an octa champ uh which means i
won uh eight shows in a row which is um
the maximum they let you do before they
uh kick you off okay so so the youngest
ever
oxford champion yeah i guess you hold
this title forever now because you're
not allowed on
if you're under yeah you have to be 16
now to your game so
forever this guy right here youngest
ever
countdown is pretty cool and then james
would you like to
tell everyone a bit about yourself yeah
i'm james martin um i was on countdown
way back
in 1997.
um at an age slightly older than 11.
and yeah these days i do master i've
worked in
cambridge and in paris and now here in
oxford yes me and james are colleagues
so and you're also quite famous though
for your countdown
it got on youtube it got on youtube this
is this is mr 952
which may mean something to some of you
watching we will talk more about that
later but james also has a
a very good record in canada shall we
say how many did you win in a row uh
also eight yeah also
well we've got two actors i didn't even
know this this is amazing
all right and as i said lots and lots of
special guests so these two
with their countdown expertise but also
the maths appeal team are back
hi hi so guys tell us what's going on
tell everyone all about yourselves i'm
bobby siegel and i'm susan okay
and we are team matt that's appeal
and then we do a podcast and it's about
trying to make math accessible
to everyone um and we're here
to learn how to get good we can't then
exactly and these guys are gonna give us
the skills and tools and the confidence
by watching them play
yeah on how to get rid of this game i
will be doing the words and the numbers
as in write them down yes they will be
my co-hosts
so james and kai will be playing against
each other in our modified version of
the famous game show
and then over in the corner we've got
bobby and susan the matte appeal team
together to be our experts for the
letters
and the numbers round one is going to be
james we'll be going first so james
thank you sean
hey
ah
e consonant
c and about
right now before we start the time i
should have mentioned earlier
to completely throw a spanner in the
works you get double points
for a word that is maths themed if you
can then explain it
okay so your time starts now
[Music]
and time is up okay
so seeing as james picked the letters
let's let kai
give us his word first um i i've got a
four
but it's a mattie paul okay so we've got
he's going straight in with the new rule
of the four and it's a massive four so
that's equivalent to an eight
well i'm going to argue a massey six
six right
james what do you think you have then
okay i want to have
awards okay aww
yes and can you convince us why this
should be matty yeah
i think you know all these competitions
mass competition masters olympiads
national challenges you can win gold
awards you can win some rewards
awards this is true this is true do we
have any thoughts over in the maths
appeal team what do we think
are we going to give him this is a matty
word or are we in schools we
encourage people to enter the junior
intermediate senior math challenges yeah
i mean i
see as for me i'd say that it's quite
tenuous i mean i like it
but i don't know whether it's
technically a word
that is used in a maths context because
you have awards for geography
or see this is what i was thinking like
i like
i like the idea it's crazy okay tell you
what i'm going to do
we're going to hear kai is four okay and
that's one and maybe maybe you'll both
get points i'm gonna we're gonna play in
my ear at this point kai what do you
think
my four is arcs uh so an arc is
sort of part of a circle basically a
curve part of a circle
um sort of in a mathematical term we use
them when we're measuring angles in
circles and then
things like that yeah so yeah i think
that one is mathematically
awkward they're very happy with that um
so i tell you what what should we do
then this is
i think it's still a good word it is six
points as opposed to double
yeah six can we give a double for kai
and then just a
straight six okay so we're just gonna
give them both points
okay all right i'm gonna get double
points though because it's a math word
yeah
yeah okay so we're gonna give kai eight
points because we like that was a very
very nice answer thank you thank you
well done
and and james it's a very good word so
we'll also give you we'll give you six
i think i hope that's fair disagree with
us just tell us but you know we've
awarded the points now
it was a democratic decision amongst the
three co-hosts
matt's appeal team could we have had
anything better
than kai's matzi iv or james's solid
six yes so i'm gonna give susan a clue
what are you doing yeah
is it meant to be square shape yeah the
shapes
okay
okay right on to round two and this time
it must be
kai thank you very much uh those letters
please
could i have a consonant t and a vowel
e and another vowel
a and a consonant
f and a consonant
and a final constant please
why and your time starts now
[Music]
and time is up it's very entertaining
watching you both do this
because i can sort of see what's going
on
yeah there's very different approaches
it's quite we'll talk more about this
it's quite interesting um okay so you
pick the lessons up tenkai so we'll go
to james first
what do we think we've got six we've got
six from james and that is
um okay uh i have a six as well and uh
i'm afraid it's also non-matthew
okay so we've got two sixes oh it's not
lassie so that means i guess james do
you want to go first
wafted wafted i also got wafted yes
you can have a look if you'd like yeah
yeah yeah just
to confirm yeah so i'm not actually sure
i know what that word means i'll be any
insight
what this if i sort of walked and walked
through
okay right fantastic so i guess that
means
six points a piece mass appeal team did
we have anything
better yes we found one actually i
missed this but
susan's eagle eye spotted
feet imperial unit of measurement
okay yes very nice equal to 12 inches of
course
oh someone wants both
ways to go i like it
um because that would have been eight
yeah that would indeed have been eight
yes
very good very good okay round number
three we've had
two letters rounds so far so this brings
us to the numbers which i'm super
excited about i know the matte appeal
team is super excited we finally get to
do maths and numbers
and these guys also being mathematicians
i'm sure
this is why we're really here isn't it
like
okay so james i believe it is going to
be your turn okay could i have four
large numbers and two small numbers
please
the classic james martin tactic here
okay all right so we have
3 6
100 75
50 and 25.
and the target is 952
and your time starts now
but does he remember how to do it
[Music]
time okay so i think james might
recognize this i do recommend it
because what's going on i have a
different solution to our feet all right
okay
did you manage to get there or um
no i got one away nine five three wow
okay
so we start with james who claims he's
got 952 don't we
uh yeah okay i hope this works um
g5 times six is 450.
450. divided by 5 is
9. divided by 50 is 9
100 plus 3 is 103
multiplied by the nine is nine two seven
[Applause]
and i think i think just for the for the
viewers how did that differ from your
original
952. can i remember how the original one
worked something
wrong no i've just got it i've just got
it
from the original 952. i believe so
james no this is your moment this is
your thing plus six is 106.
multiplied by three is 318.
118. yeah yeah three three one eight
three one eight oh sorry
okay and then the plan is i want to
multiply by three and take away two
so i'm going to multiply it by 75.
what can you do wow
which is
okay it's still looking uh yeah
and divided by 25.
that's brilliant
divided by 25 yeah
equals
still even having seen this before yeah
still just
still amazing
sorry we could not do that okay
right so i guess james gets a solid 10
points then
so two letters rounds and one numbers
round in
brings us to round four and our first
conundrum of the game not yet to be
revealed
very soon i've seen a very eager mr
bobby seagull behind the camera
um so before we do that though we need
buzzers
don't we so would you decide upon your
own
method of buzz uh could go uh
okay we've got we've got an actual
buzzer noise from cat
i think i'm just gonna go with him okay
james and sophie if we
if i hear her hit the table that's james
and some attempt because i practiced
very good at this i can do um okay
right so are we both ready are we both
ready okay three
two one go
[Music]
i think it's enumerator enumerator yeah
[Applause]
perfect right very very well done can
you just repeat your answer
no i've likely said enumeration
[Music]
um no i'm not claiming my tent for that
okay it was pretty close though
it's a lot closer than i was anyway i
think even if your competitor is
agreeing i was thinking we should give
you some points
your competitors are things you deserve
so
the denominator of the score is normally
10 points so we should give a numerator
of that denominator
well does it um so well how much how
many do you think
i'll let the mathematical team decide i
know it's your conundrum how many points
you think james deserves
i think we should do a mean of this so
there's ten points on offer we all have
two to give
and see who so you uh it's the car you
think you should get
do you think he's getting two of your
points yes i think so yeah okay
so i'll say one i think half
zero okay
i'd give one as well so that two plus
one plus one plus one is
five five so you're getting five points
james whether you like it or not
yeah unfortunately
right well it's going to be a letters
round now um so we
last it's really hard for me to remember
this so we had we had james kai james
kai
yes let us download right could we go
with a consonant please
l uh and a vowel
oh that consonant
d a vowel please
oh
there it is
let's have a vowel please a
and a consonant c
uh vowel
e and we'll have a final constant please
s okay and i'm also going to award
a undecided amount of bonus points if
you use that
okay
starts now
[Music]
[Laughter]
right so can i pick the letters which
means i will go to you
first i'm going to go with a
mathematical six we've got a
mathematical six uh i also have a
mathematical six
six all right so james what's your
mathematical method six is closed
captioning not
if it doesn't available its endpoints so
you can get as close to zero or one as
you want but never actually to those
numbers that's right
so like no point no no no no no no no
one and no point no no no no no no no no
no no
but never zero or one correct okay and i
think at school gcse we actually have
the
inequalities yes are you talking about
this
if we have zero and one and then
we have a circle but it's not colored
and that'll be a close
that's open ah nice because it's not
including those
one and zero okay but if it was that
this is
open but if we color them in the middle
of this
that would include zero and one awesome
right
nice little side tangent there
that's good that's good that's what we
like tangent tangent
was that deliberate side tangent
absolutely yeah
you know bonus points for yourself
thanks guys um okay so that is
definitely 12 and kai
you declared yes it's close as well yes
yeah okay also has closed i
couldn't have explained it quite as well
but uh that was well i mean
no fantastic right and then mass appeal
team did we get anything else over there
so there's obviously the word scale is
there would scale to be a mathematical
yes scale is always
scary scale something up definitely and
also my parents are from india so i like
the word
ladoos you know ladies the nice yellow
indian ball sweets you get divided
l-a-d-o-o-s ladoos
really delicious because they're spheres
aren't there
mathematical objects now this is very
scary
but they do like the word they don't
know about that so thank you for
educating
those double points double points it's a
sphere
it's got two it's got two circles in the
air in the world
right so that's gonna be 12 points each
okay round number six
this is going to be another letters
round and kai just chose the letters
so this time it's going to be is this
round
yes i thought i was just dead i'm glad
that you're yeah okay
i was struggling here you know yeah me
too um so
yes round number six is gonna be letters
again uh james i believe it is your turn
to pick those letters
okay uh vowel please bobby
e and another one
you and another one should just stop
there now
oh
anna consonants ah
and another consonant l
and another one ah
and a consonant
r
and a consonant t
and a vowel o
and your time starts now
[Music]
right time is up what have we
got james kai i don't know who's going
first who wants to go first
can i go first go on i'll go i've got a
i've got a mathematical five
okay we've got a mathematical five from
kai um
also mathematical five james is also
thinking about classical five so
i guess why not get james this time
james what's your mom want to go find
okay i've got ruler okay that's i think
that's pretty mathematical
um but just just because to keep
consistent can you
use it to measure things you use it to
measure things i think we can all agree
it's a very mathematical piece of
stationary and we we use straight lines
all the time in maths as well we do in
geometry so we're drawing straight lines
as well as measuring them
multi-purpose tool yeah ruler
encompasses
so you're clearly enjoying them so
euclidean geometry too isn't it yeah
students at school have in their
equipment pack and they can sometimes
misuse them as well
[Laughter]
last appeal team did can we beat a
10 so a mathematical five what did we
get over there so mathematically we
can't beat it we get a five
computer says no and our word is
e-r
i feel like kai bobby should have like a
sound off
like guys little buzzer obviously yeah
non-mathematically we can get realtor
or relator okay so
nice words but but again in our scoring
system
yes exactly right okay so that's going
to bring us on to the numbers round
again
uh isn't it right so should we just jump
straight in i think
kai numbers please
um could i have a six small please
five eight
nine five
four three
and your time starts nope getting ahead
of myself
you need a total don't you
okay now your time starts
[Music]
okay time is up james
i will go to you first does kai pick the
numbers i think i have
940. okay we have i think i have 940
and kai i also think i have
about the same level of confidence okay
okay so
um as james explained
fantastically 952 last time i think we
will we'll give you your chance your
moment
to shine thank you kindly so 9 40.
let's see so i've started 9 times 5 is
45.
then multiply that by 4 which gives you
180. you add 8 to that as 188
and then all going well you multiply by
five that
should hopefully be nine four zero
do we do we agree maths appeal to you
yeah yeah and maths appeal is a little
maths trick
probably the one that can't learn
experts know but when we teach our
students to multiply by five we say that
five
is the same as times ten divided by two
to do
188 times ten which is
this is one thousand eight hundred
eighty then we divide we'll divide that
by two yeah
that's what that's times e by five
that's just a little trick nice
yeah very helpful okay right so i guess
that's
well we don't know james did you get the
same package
you are yes same message yeah fantastic
right brilliant well done both that's
going to be
temples each things are hotting up in
round number eight
with the scores they are about 13 apart
59 we'll actually you've been keeping
score season what are the scores so
we've got
kai on 46 and we've got james on
59. okay so based on the pattern we've
been doing so far
you might be expecting a conundrum
however
we want to end the show in the conundrum
and we did mention earlier that we
should probably do a bonus
numbers around you know all being
mathematicians here we're all keen for
this
and you know we kind of set james up
with nine part two
just to make it completely fair we're
gonna do round eight is gonna be another
numbers round
really really just you know because we
love math so much and then we will end
on a big conundrum
so this it's just still got a chance car
it's still he's still in the game
feeling the game okay so
this must therefore be james's yeah
let's have a four from the top that we
have not seen before okay
six seven
25 50
75 and 100
please be 952 and your target is eight
to five and your time starts now
can you also get 952 for bonus points
[Music]
and time is up okay so we'll do the
original one first before i then
completely changed the rules probably
through the round
as i've been doing a lot um right kai
what did you get
i got eight two five tom okay and james
i think
we saw you looking pretty confident
early on is that also uh
yeah all right so so kai do you want to
give us a shot yes sure uh seven times a
hundred
to kick it off 700 and then i just added
the 75
and 50. yeah nice
okay and then james showed me the same
thing
right did anyone get anywhere near five
two yes where did you get yes i got nine
five two go for it yeah okay right
all right
[Applause]
multiply that by 75. very nice
which is 975
and then you take away the 25 gives you
950 and you're left over with the 150
yeah so you do 100 divided by 50 gives
you the two
and add it on i think that's about it
two in one ladies
right so in that case i think that's
going to be 20 points to kai and 10
points to james
and that makes it nice and close for the
biggest
okay this is now the big finale it's
you you would think we may have set this
up i mean
you guys have been watching this is
legit this is actually
the big final showdown between these two
famous faces from the history of
countdown the the scores
have a difference of three and the final
conundrum is worth 10. i mean literally
it's all on the table here
it is it is this is it really i mean i'm
just building this look to make you both
really nervous
oh entirely on purpose like my heart
beating out my chest
okay right so just final thing before we
reveal buzzers are we sticking the same
are we going to
and change you're gonna table hand on
table again all right well last time
29 seconds okay so three
two one go
is it algorithm
yes it is it is yes very very great
very very quick kai wins that's it
that's it
very well played very well
thank you i think i think if we had
scored this correctly probably james
would have
not to take anything away from you guys
but charlie sure i did get ten
completely freaking george's points
for something i did 25 years ago
but you know it still deserved ten
points even if it happened 25 years ago
right so so again very very well done um
thank you
kai who was who's the champion
commiseration james was a solid effort
and we all really enjoyed seeing 952
again
thank you for being a good sport and of
course co-host matt's appeal team
thank you so much hope you guys had fun
oh yeah it was brilliant
i quite liked admiration we honestly
we've got to have some proper chit chat
about
your strategies because watching you do
the working out pretty amazing
yeah i agree i agree and that will be
coming next so you should all now having
watched this fantastic video
first of all totally subscribe to my
channel right you will know this
but then also watch the second part of
the video where we're going to have a
chat
all three of us myself the master plt
bobby and susan and james and kai and
we're going to talk all things countdown
how do they do it
how do they prepare what tips and sort
of techniques can we take away from it
um so yeah just click on that video
really right thank you very much